You wake up in a new world.
Your eyes open
to bright, confusing lights.
Your ears are filled
with mysterious sounds.
Everything around you feels unfamiliar.
This is a reality of a newborn baby.
So what is it like to be a newborn?
For a philosopher
and a psychologist like me,
this is a fascinating question.
It is hard enough to know
what's going on in adults' minds.
What could be going on
in a newborn baby's mind?
Do babies have consciousness?
The subjective experience
of their mind and the world.
In adults, consciousness
involves experiences
of seeing, hearing and thinking,
and feelings of pain,
pleasure and emotions.
Do babies also have
this experience and feelings
that light up their inner world?
So the traditional view is
that newborns are passive observers
of overwhelming chaos,
and they may not be conscious at all.
It sounds unbelievable today,
but 50 years ago,
doctors routinely performed circumcision
without anaesthetic,
convinced that newborns' immature brain
could not feel pain.
Since then, developmental psychologists
have shown that infants' abilities
are much more complex
than we thought before.
But the question of infant consciousness
has remained open.
One problem is that infants
cannot tell us how they feel.
They cannot describe their thoughts.
And they certainly cannot
take a consciousness test.
So how can we know
what's going on inside their minds?
One answer is to measure infants' brains.
Over the past few decades,
the science of consciousness
has told us a lot
about the brain basis
of consciousness in adults.
We found neural signals
that are only active
when an adult is consciously
perceiving a stimulus.
Recently, neuroscientists
found the same neural signals
in infants' brains.
These provide powerful new evidence
that infants might be
actively experiencing their surroundings
from a remarkably early age.
One innovative experiment in neuroscience
is the audible paradigm.
This is a test of how our brain reacts
when something unexpected happens.
I love this paradigm,
and here’s how it works.
Imagine repeatedly hearing
the same sequence of sounds.
Beep, beep, beep, boop.
Suddenly, this familiar pattern
is interrupted by a different sequence.
Beep, beep, beep, beep.
Instantly, your brain
detects the surprise,
producing a measurable brain signal
called the P300 wave.
This oddball response
to an expected sequence of sounds
only happens when
an individual is conscious.
People in deep sleep don't have it.
People in comas don't have it.
But newborn babies do.
The neuroscientist Ghislaine Dehaene
has found that when babies
are just a few days old,
they show the same type of brain activity
in response to this oddball
sequence of sounds.
What this suggests
is that right from birth,
infants might be truly experiencing
conscious perceptions
and conscious expectations.
Researchers have also looked
for consciousness
through patterns
of attention in the brain.
In conscious adults’ brains,
different types of networks
alternate their activity
when we switch our attention
between the external world
and our internal thoughts.
You know how it is.
You might be doing this right now.
You focus your attention
on the speaker for a while,
and then you daydream for a while.
(Laughter)
It turns out that infants
do the same sort of thing.
The neuroscientist Lorina Naci
recently observed
the same type of alternation
between these networks in newborn brains.
This suggests that these switches of focus
of internal and external awareness
are present right from birth.
There is also evidence
from gaps in attention.
When our mind
intensely focuses on one thing,
it usually becomes blind to something
that happens immediately afterward.
We call this phenomenon attentional blink.
Infants experience this phenomenon too,
but in slow motion.
At three months old,
infants take near a full second
to shift their attention
from one visual cue to another,
compared to adults that can manage
this shift much faster.
Amazingly, infants showing
the same type of brain response
when this happens
is strongly hinting they are actively
experiencing their environment.
Researchers have also found
relevant brain patterns
in premature infants.
Which makes you wonder,
could consciousness begin before birth?
This is a really important question.
I told you all how scientists apply
the audible test to newborns.
Well,
they applied the same test
to late-term fetuses
around 35 weeks into pregnancy.
The results were striking.
Fetus shows the same type
of brain response as we found in newborns.
So even before birth
and entering the world,
babies seem to be capable
of consciously processing sounds,
meaning their awareness might develop
while they are still in the womb.
Of course, these results
have potential implications
scientifically, medically and ethically.
For a start, we now know
that when we perform surgery on newborns
or premature infants
or late-term fetuses,
we should give them an anesthetic.
I know that many of you will be thinking
about the abortion debate.
In that context, I should stress
that our strongest evidence
is that consciousness
requires brain structures
that emerge after 24 weeks of gestation,
a time when abortion is rare.
The new evidence
[that newborns are conscious]
might extend to fetuses
in third trimester of gestation,
but it doesn't extend
to earlier than that.
This is a new understanding,
and this new understanding
is a work in progress,
but might change our picture
of newborn babies.
They are not passive creatures
waiting for consciousness to switch on.
They are tiny humans
already perceiving patterns
and interacting with the world
in a meaningful way.
As human life unfolds,
consciousness unfolds with it.
Our sense of ourselves grows and changes.
Our consciousness waxes and wanes
until one day it ends.
From the moment we take our first breath
to the moment of our deaths,
our lives are lit
by the flame of awareness.
We share this flame with other animals
and we might one day
share it with machines.
Collectively, our conscious minds
illuminate the universe,
and though each flame eventually fades,
the light of consciousness
never disappears.
It is rekindled with each new life
in the endless dance of existence.
Thank you.
(Applause)